#!perl -w

# Copyright 2010, 2011, 2012 Kevin Ryde

# This file is part of Math-Image.
#
# Math-Image is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
# Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option) any later
# version.
#
# Math-Image is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
# WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
# or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
# for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
# with Math-Image.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

use 5.004;
use strict;
use App::MathImage;

use vars '$VERSION';
$VERSION = 109;

exit App::MathImage->command_line;

__END__

=for stopwords recurrences Gtk Gtk2 Ulam's --ulam Ulam Vogel pronic
--pronic fibonacci --fibonacci fullscreen --fullscreen unfullscreened --png
png --xpm xpm RGB menubar toplevel colormap Ryde ie perrin --perrin padovan
--padovan Perrin Padovan Vogel's --vogel Archimedian WIDTHxHEIGHT
--theodorus Theodorus semiprimes segfault Aronson's --aronson startup
GdkPixbuf prima Prima --prima tty renamings MathImageFoo OEIS tribonnaci
PseudoColor TrueColor PNGwriter Imager ImageMagick Tk tk PythagoreanTree

=head1 NAME

math-image -- display some mathematical images

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 math-image [--options]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<math-image> displays some mathematical images, either

=over

=item *

in a Gtk2 GUI,

=item *

as an image file output,

=item * or setting the root window.

=back

There's lots of options for what to display, in particular it includes
Ulam's spiral of prime numbers, and several variations on the numbers in a
path such as Sacks spiral and Vogel floret.  Try C<--random> or the
Randomize button for interesting combinations.

Most of the code is plain Perl, so it's not blindingly fast, but the GUI or
root window is drawn progressively so you can see what's happening.  In the
GUI you can change the controls while drawing to start again on something
else.

Mouse button 1 in the GUI drags the image to see parts away from the origin
and which otherwise wouldn't fit on screen.  This can become quite slow when
displaying things like prime numbers which must be calculated all the way up
to the desired part.

The number sequences displayed come from L<Math::NumSeq>, and the paths
they're plotted on from L<Math::PlanePath>.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Values Options

The following options control what set of values to display.  The
C<--values> option described last is the most general.

=over

=item --primes

The prime numbers.

=item --twin

=item --twin1

=item --twin2

The twin primes.  C<--twin> is both twins like 11,13.  C<--twin1> is just
the first of each like 11, or C<--twin2> is just the second like 13.

=item --semi-primes

=item --semi-primes-odd

The semi-prime or bi-prime numbers, meaning integers which have two prime
factors p*q.  This includes p==q squares of primes.  C<--semi-primes-odd> is
just the odd semiprimes, so 2 excluded from p and q.

=item --squares

The perfect squares 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, etc.

=item --pronic

The pronic numbers 2, 6, 12, 20, 30, 42, etc, k*(k+1).  These are half way
between successive perfect squares, and twice the triangular numbers.

=item --triangular

The triangular numbers 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, etc, k*(k+1)/2.

=item --polygonal=K

The K-sided polygon numbers.  For example C<--polygonal=3> is the triangular
numbers, C<--polygonal=4> is the squares.

=item --cubes

=item --tetrahedral

The cubes 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, etc or tetrahedral numbers 1, 4, 10, 20, 35,
56, etc.  These tend to grow too quickly to display much of a pattern,
though the Vogel floret is close,

    math-image --cubes --vogel

=item --fibonacci

The Fibonacci numbers 1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21, etc.  On the Vogel floret these
fall on an axis going to the right.  For other spirals and paths they tend
to grow too quickly to show much.

=item --perrin

The Perrin numbers 3, 0, 2, 3, 2, 5, 5, 7, 10, etc.  These are a cubic
recurrence and tend to grow too quickly to display much of a pattern.

=cut

# Math::NumSeq::Padovan not ready yet
#
# =item --padovan
# 
#   Or Padovan numbers 1,
# 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, etc.

=item --fraction=5/29

=item --fraction=1.234

The digits in the decimal expansion of a fraction.  For example the default
in the GUI is 5/29.  A decimal like 1.234 means 1234/1000.

A fraction is always a repeating pattern, with length no longer than the
denominator, but it can give interesting patterns for various paths.  For
example

    math-image --corner \
               --values=FractionDigits,radix=2,fraction=1/137

is the fine structure constant 1/137 in binary on the Corner path and is a
repeating pattern of an angry man with a beard and a skull wearing a hat.
No doubt this has deep cosmic significance.

=item --all

=item --odd

=item --even

All integers, or just odd or even integers.  For the paths which fill the
plane C<--all> will just fill the screen (slowly!), but for things like
C<--sacks> and C<--vogel> it shows where all the points lie.

=item --aronson

Aronson's sequence 1,4,9,... of "T is the first, fourth, ninth, ...".  This
requires the C<Math::NumSeq::Aronson> module.

=item --expression='i**2 + 2*i + 1'

Draw values following a formula.  It should have a single variable which
will be evaluated at 0,1,2, etc.  The default is Perl syntax on an "i".  See
L<Math::NumSeq::Expression> for more information.

=item --oeis=A000217

Values selected by their A-number per Sloane's Online Encyclopedia of
Integer Sequences.  Some A-numbers are implemented by code modules, others
can be read from files in a F<~/OEIS/> directory.  See L<Math::NumSeq::OEIS>
for details.  For example the triangular numbers are A000217,

    math-image --oeis=A000217

=item --lines

Draw lines along the path instead of a set of selected points.  This shows
where a path travels though you may have to increase the C<--scale> to see
it properly.

When the scale is big enough the usual figure is drawn at each point
(default a square or circle).  Use C<--figure=point> for just the lines.

=item --values=MODULE

=item --values=MODULE,NAME=VALUE,NAME=VALUE,...

Draw values from the given C<Math::NumSeq> module (including experimental
C<MathImageWhatever> ones).  For example

    math-image --values=Emirps

Parameters can be passed as comma separated NAME=VALUE, for example

    math-image --values=TwinPrimes,pairs=both

The File module can read values from a text file

    math-image --values=File,filename=/my/dir/data.txt

=back

=head2 Path Options

The following control the path in the plane where on which the values will
be displayed.  The C<--path> option described last is the most general.

=over 4

=item --ulam

Ulam's primes in a square spiral (currently the default).

=item --vogel

Vogel's floret design for the positions of seeds in a sunflower (see
L<Math::PlanePath::VogelFloret>).  Try the following to see all the points
in the pattern before applying various special sets of values.

    math-image --vogel --all --scale=10

Scaling up helps the circles draw properly.  When the values displayed are
less than all the integers a lower scale can be used.

=item --sacks

An Archimedian spiral with the square root as angle of rotation, by Robert
Sacks (see L<Math::PlanePath::SacksSpiral>).

=item --theodorus

The spiral of Theodorus or square-root spiral (see
L<Math::PlanePath::TheodorusSpiral>).

=item --diamond

A diamond shaped spiral (see L<Math::PlanePath::DiamondSpiral>).

=item --pyramid

The sides of a pyramid shape (see L<Math::PlanePath::PyramidSides>).

=item --pyramid-rows

A pyramid made from horizontal rows (see L<Math::PlanePath::PyramidRows>).

=item --corner

=item --diagonals

Corners or diagonals between the X and Y axes, per
L<Math::PlanePath::Corner> and L<Math::PlanePath::Diagonals>.

=item --rows

=item --columns

Points drawn in successive rows or columns.

=item --path=MODULE

=item --path=MODULE,NAME=VALUE,NAME=VALUE,...

Draw with the given C<Math::PlanePath> module.  For example

    math-image --path=HeptSpiralSkewed

This includes experimental paths "MathImageFoo", but expect them to change
when finished.

Parameters to the path can be supplied as comma separated C<NAME=VALUE>.
For example,

    math-image --path=SquareSpiral,wider=3

=back

=head2 Other Options

=over

=item --random

Choose a path and values at random.  For example in your F<~/.xsession>

    math-image --root --random

=item --foreground=COLOUR

=item --background=COLOUR

Set the foreground and background colours.  The colours can be either names
or hex style #RRGGBB or #RRRRGGGGBBBB.  For example white on a shade of red,

    math-image --foreground=white --background=#A01010

The default is white foreground on black background.  For a C<--root>
background a full white can be a bit hard on the eye when there's a lot of
points shown.  Try a shade of grey instead

    math-image --root --foreground=lightgrey

Available names depend on the output module.  Gtk2 uses a hard-coded copy of
the X F</etc/X11/rgb.txt>.  C<X11::Protocol> C<--root> uses the server's
database.  C<--png> with GD has the C<GD::Simple> names.  C<--xpm> with
C<Image::Xpm> passes anything at all through to the file.  For C<--text>
currently the colours can be single characters to show, though perhaps that
will change.

=item --size=PIXELS

=item --size=WIDTHxHEIGHT

Set the size of the image in pixels.  A single value means that size square,
otherwise WIDTHxHEIGHT.  For C<--root> this size is currently ignored and
the full screen used.

For the GUI this is an initial size, though the menu bar might make the
window wider than requested.  Under C<--fullscreen> the size is the
unfullscreened window if you switch back to that (menu entry
Tools/Fullscreen).

The default for the GUI is about 4/5 of the screen.  The default for PNG etc
image file output is an arbitrary 200x200, or for C<--text> output the size
of the terminal from C<Term::Size>.

=item --scale=PIXELS

How many pixels for each value shown.  The current default is 3 to show 3x3
pixel squares, or for C<--text> output just 1 for a single character per
point.

=item --figure=F

Draw a given shape figure at each point.  The default is either a square or
circle depending on the path.  The choices are

    point             single pixel
    square            solid
    box               unfilled square
    circle            solid
    ring              unfilled circle
    diamond           solid
    diamunf           unfilled diamond
    plus              "+" shape
    X                 "X" shape
    L                 "L" shape
    V                 "V" shape
    arrow             arrow in direction of path

=cut

# not sure about these yet
    # triangle
    # hexagon
    # undiamond
    # unellipse

=item --help, -?

Print a summary of the options.

=item --version

Print the program version number.

=back

=head2 GUI Options

The default is to run the Gtk GUI.

=over

=item --display=DPY

Select the X server for X11 or Gtk output.  The default is from the
C<DISPLAY> environment variable (normally set at X startup).

    math-image --display=:3

=item --fullscreen

Start the GUI in full screen mode.  The Tools/Fullscreen menu entry can
toggle between full screen and a normal window.  In full screen mode the
menus still work, just press Alt-F, Alt-T, etc as normal to pop up.

=item --wx

Run the wxWidgets GUI.  This requires wxPerl (see L<Wx>), probably for
wxWidgets 2.8 or higher.  It might have a few less features than the Gtk2
GUI.

=item --prima

Run the Prima GUI.  This requires the Prima module (see L<Prima>) and the
separate C<Image::Base::Prima::Drawable> module.  It doesn't yet have the
full set of options the Gtk2 GUI does, but works as far as it goes.

=item --tk

Run the Tk GUI.  This requires Perl-Tk (see L<Tk>).  It doesn't yet have the
full set of options the Gtk GUI does, but works as far as it goes.

=item --<gtk-options>

Standard Gtk options.  See L<gtk-options(7)> for the full list.  The only
one which does much for C<math-image> is C<--display> to set the X display
(default from the C<DISPLAY> environment variable).

=back

The Gtk and Prima GUIs have printer output through their usual printing
mechanisms.  In the current code the Gtk one is a screen dump but the Prima
one is a PostScript re-run of the image drawing which might be a bit slow,
but might be higher resolution for circle figures.

There's some very rudimentary support for other GUIs with C<--module=Curses>
for C<Curses::UI> and C<--module=Gtk1> for the older Gtk 1.2 and
corresponding Gtk-Perl.  They're only meant to see how well those GUIs work
as yet.

=head2 Output Types

=over

=item --root

Set the root window background to the requested image and exit.  For example
to draw a random image from your F<~/.xsession> startup,

    math-image --root --random &

Add C<--verbose> to print what was chosen and displayed.  Output from
F<~/.xsession> normally goes to the F<~/.xsession-errors> file.  Sometimes
C<--random> may use a lot of memory, so consider C<limit> or C<timeout>
both, and perhaps low priority (see L<sh(1)>, L<timeout(1)> and L<nice(1)>).

The root window is set with C<Gtk2>, or under X with
C<X11::Protocol::XSetRoot> if available.  C<XSetRoot> allows C<--foreground>
and C<--background> colours to be preserved on a PseudoColor visual, and it
can act on an C<__SWM_VROOT> style window manager virtual root desktop.
C<Gtk2> is fine on a TrueColor and for black and white (being permanent
pixels), but on a PseudoColor allocated colours may not be preserved.

=item --flash

Flash the requested image on the screen instead of starting the GUI.
A combination C<--root --flash> means draw to the root and then flash.  This
is good if updating the background randomly every so often, since it shows
the completed image briefly where it might be hidden by lots of windows.

    math-image --root --random --flash

The flash is done with a temporary full-screen window, either some X11
native or a Gtk2 (see L<Gtk2::Ex::Splash>).  In both cases the keyboard
focus is unchanged so you don't lose any typing, but it does eat mouse
clicks.

=item --png

=item --xpm

Write a PNG or XPM image file to standard output and exit.  PNG is always
possible with C<Gtk2::Gdk::Pixbuf> but it can also use GD, PNGwriter,
Imager, ImageMagick, Prima, Tk or Wx with the right libraries and
C<Image::Base> supporting module.

    math-image --png >/tmp/my-file.png

XPM output requires either C<Image::Xpm>, ImageMagick, Prima, Tk or Wx.
Prima, Tk and Wx for X11 use the X server even for file output and may give
obscure error messages if no display.

Combinations C<--prima --png>, or C<--tk --xpm>, etc, force the respective
output module rather than an automatic choice among available possibilities.

=item --text

Write a text-only image to standard output and exit.  The default size
follows the terminal with C<Term::Size> or can be set with
C<--size=WIDTH,HEIGHT>, A typical tty size like 80x25 is usually too small
to see much, but a bigger image might be cute to send to a line printer or
similar.

    math-image --text --size=130x49 | lpr

For images which would be colours in the GUI the text output is a digit
which is the value at that point.  This is slightly experimental, especially
for big sequence values, but currently for example

    math-image --values=PrimeFactorCount --text --size=5x5

    14221
    31213
    12011
    31322
    22142

=item --xscreensaver

Run under the L<xscreensaver(1)> program.  This requires the
C<X11::Protocol::XSetRoot> module and is slightly experimental, but works as
far as it goes.

To make C<math-image> available in C<xscreensaver> add to the "programs:"
section of your F<~/.xscreensaver> file,

    math-image --xscreensaver \n\

F<xscreensaver/math-image.xml> in the Math-Image sources can be used give a
description in the C<xscreensaver-demo> program.  Currently "make install"
doesn't try to install this so it must be copied manually to the
F</usr/share/xscreensaver/config/> directory..

There's no options for the screensaver yet.  The intention would be a
control for the redraw rate, unless there's a global xscreensaver option for
that, and to limit each image drawing to the redraw time so slow or very
slow things aren't continued indefinitely.

For reference, under C<xscreensaver> a saver program draws to a target
window given either by a C<-window-id> command line option from
C<xscreensaver-demo>, or by C<__SWM_VROOT> root window property from the
C<xscreensaver> daemon.  The latter is recognised by
C<X11::Protocol::XSetRoot> version 18 and up.

=back

=head1 MODULES

In addition to the various modules noted above, the following are used in
the Gtk2 GUI if available,

=over

=item C<Gtk2::Ex::PodViewer>

=item C<Tk::Pod>

=item C<Wx::Perl::PodBrowser>

The "Help/POD Documentation" menu items to display this documentation and
the various path and values classes, under Gtk, Tk or Wx respectively.

=item C<Gtk2::Ex::CrossHair>

Lines following the cursor, enabled from the Tools/Cross menu item.

=item C<Gtk2::Ex::ErrorTextDialog>

Error messages in a dialog instead of to C<STDERR>.  Of course there
shouldn't be any errors!

=item C<Gtk2::Ex::QuadButton>

Scroll arrows in the bottom right corner.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item C<DISPLAY>

The X display to use.

=back

=head1 BUGS

Some of the values plotted can be a slow to generate or use a lot of memory,
or both.  When the path goes out to large positions, or when scrolled out
away from the origin the display might hang a little or a lot while
generating values.

The paths which have big N values near the origin, such as RationalsTree or
PythagoreanTree, are calculated with C<Math::BigInt> for accuracy.  This
becomes very slow.  In some cases the values and/or path calculations might
end up rounding off anyway.

When plotting colours on paths which duplicate points (eg. the DragonCurve),
the colour shown is sometimes the smallest N or sometimes the biggest N due
to overwriting.  Not sure whether to try some colour mixing, or force the
smallest among overlaps.

Colours for counts etc have some hard-coded scaling to show a range of
colours for the typical range of values.  There ought to be a user control
for this.  Perhaps relevant NumSeq modules should indicate their approximate
growth rate to make a sensible initial scale.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<gtk-options(7)>, L<xsetroot(1)>

L<Math::PlanePath>,
L<Math::NumSeq>

L<Gtk2>,
L<X11::Protocol>,
L<X11::Protocol::XSetRoot>,
L<Gtk2::Ex::PodViewer>,
L<Gtk2::Ex::CrossHair>,
L<Gtk2::Ex::ErrorTextDialog>

=head1 HOME PAGE

http://user42.tuxfamily.org/math-image/index.html

=head1 LICENSE

Math-Image is Copyright 2010, 2011, 2012 Kevin Ryde

Math-Image is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option) any later
version.

Math-Image is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
Math-Image.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
