# Copyright 2011 Kevin Ryde

# This file is part of Math-Image.
#
# Math-Image is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
# Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option) any later
# version.
#
# Math-Image is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
# WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
# or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
# for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
# with Math-Image.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=for stopwords Ryde MathImage

=head1 NAME

App::MathImage::NumSeq -- number sequences

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a set of number sequences and some manipulations of them.
It's a touch rough yet, but the idea is iterate through things like
squares or primes in a generic way.

C<App::MathImage::NumSeq::Sequence::...> are the sequence classes.
See L<App::MathImage::NumSeq::Sequence> for the functions etc common
to all the sequences.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<App::MathImage::NumSeq::Sequence>

=head1 HOME PAGE

http://user42.tuxfamily.org/math-image/index.html

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright 2011 Kevin Ryde

Math-Image is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option) any later
version.

Math-Image is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for
more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
Math-Image.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
